JUDY WOODRUFF: Britain's Parliament has issued
a stunning new statement on Brexit tonight:
It won't buy the prime minister's plan to
leave the European Union.
What it will buy instead is anything but clear,
after rejecting her plan by nearly 150 votes.
Special correspondent Ryan Chilcote reports
from London.
THERESA MAY, British Prime Minister: If this
vote is not passed tonight, if this deal is
not passed, then Brexit could be lost.
RYAN CHILCOTE: The future of Britain's exit
from the European Union was on the line in
day-long debate, as was Prime Minister Theresa
May's political career.
May spoke with a hoarse voice that underscored
her exhaustion from a last-ditch effort to
push her amended Brexit deal through Parliament.
THERESA MAY: I believe it is absolutely imperative
for this House that we meet the decision that
was taken by the British people in June 2016,
that we deliver on that referendum, and that
we deliver Brexit for the British people.
RYAN CHILCOTE: Her original Brexit plan suffered
a resounding defeat by a historic margin back
in January.
MAN: The ayes to the right 242, the no's to
the left 432.
RYAN CHILCOTE: With that weighing on her mind,
the prime minister made an 11th-hour trip
to Strasbourg, France, last night to seek
new concessions from the European Commission's
president.
They reached legally binding changes on one
of the deal's main sticking points: the so-called
Irish backstop that would ensure the border
between E.U. member Ireland and the United
Kingdom's Northern Ireland remains open after
Brexit.
Britain's objective: for the U.K. not to be
tied to the E.U. and its trade rules indefinitely,
should they be unable to agree on the nature
of their future relationship.
Right now, the border between Northern Ireland
and the Republic of Ireland is all but invisible.
That means cars and goods can cross freely.
May's original Brexit strategy would have
kept that border open.
THERESA MAY: A joint instrument with comparable
legal weight to the withdrawal agreement will
guarantee that the E.U. cannot act with the
intent of applying the backstop indefinitely.
RYAN CHILCOTE: But that assurance also came
with a warning
JEAN-CLAUDE JUNCKER, President, European Commission:
In politics, sometimes you get a second chance.
It is what we do with this second chance that
counts, because there will be no third chance.
There will be no further interpretation of
the interpretations, and no further assurances
of the reassurances.
RYAN CHILCOTE: Then, this morning, Britain's
attorney general, Geoffrey Cox, took the wind
out of May's sails, issuing a legal assessment
that the changes reduce, but do not eliminate
the risk the U.K. could remain trapped in
a trade union with the E.U.
GEOFFREY COX, U.K. Attorney General: The question
for the House is whether, in the light of
these improvements, as a political judgment,
the House should now enter into those arrangements.
However, the matters of law affecting withdrawal
can only inform what is essentially a political
decision that each of us must make.
RYAN CHILCOTE: The magnitude of that political
decision fueled passionate debate in Parliament.
MAN: The honorable gentleman's cheeky, chappy
chortling and chuckling away from a sedentary
position, but it's been made perfectly clear
that the prime minister's not giving way.
RYAN CHILCOTE: Opposition Labor Party leader
Jeremy Corbyn was among those who rejected
the deal.
JEREMY CORBYN, Leader, Labor Party: After
three months of running down the clock, the
prime minister has, despite very extensive
delays, achieved not a single change to the
withdrawal agreement.
Not one single word has changed.
RYAN CHILCOTE: Opponents again zeroed in on
the so-called Irish backstop.
MAN: If, in December 2020, alternate arrangements
aren't found for the backstop, we will have
a hotel California Brexit, where we will have
checked out, but we won't be leaving.
RYAN CHILCOTE: And, critically, many of May's
own allies, like Northern Ireland's Democratic
Unionist Party, refused to support the divorce
agreement.
With her coalition crumbling around her, Prime
Minister May's Brexit strategy failed to win
passage.
MAN: The ayes to the right 242, the no's to
the left 391.
So the no's have it.
The no's have it.
RYAN CHILCOTE: This evening, Prime Minister
May voiced her own frustration after the fateful
vote.
THERESA MAY: I profoundly regret the decision
that this House has taken tonight.
I continue to believe that by far the best
outcome is that the United Kingdom leaves
the European Union in an orderly fashion with
a deal.
RYAN CHILCOTE: As for the European Union and
its leaders, they're saying, look, there have
been months and months of negotiations.
The U.K. decided to leave the European Union
two-and-a-half years ago.
They're holding firm, and they're saying they're
not going to renegotiate the terms of the
U.K.'s exit from the E.U.
-- Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Ryan, what a spectacle.
Tell us what's next.
RYAN CHILCOTE: Well, tomorrow, the Parliament
is going to vote on whether the U.K. should
exit the European Union without a deal with
the E.U.
She doesn't think that's a good idea.
That said, there are people who support Brexit
that think it's a good idea, that actually
the U.K. would have more autonomy to pursue
the kind of trade deals it would like the
pursue.
Now, if that didn't get supported, if the
parliamentarians say, no, we do have to have
a deal, then on Thursday, they will have another
vote where they will be asked whether the
deadline, the March 29 deadline, when the
U.K. is supposed to leave the E.U., whether
that should be extended, pushed back.
So, two more votes coming quite possibly this
week.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And so, Ryan, I know there
are a number of directions this could go,
but what are the options after this?
RYAN CHILCOTE: So the two logical options
are, one, that the U.K. chooses to pursue
a new deal with the European Union.
Now, right now, the E.U. is saying they're
not going to renegotiate the exit terms.
However, the E.U. would love if the U.K. came
back with a softer Brexit, if they wanted
to leave the E.U., but have a closer relationship
after that with the European Union.
That would require the prime minister to reach
across party lines, if you will, to the leader
of the opposition, Jeremy Corbyn, and do some
kind of deal that they have already said that
they would support, a softer Brexit.
That seems pretty difficult to imagine.
You know, they really don't like one another.
There isn't that kind of bipartisan love,
if you will, to see something like that happen.
The other option is that this goes back to
the British people, a second referendum.
They could be asked, do you support the prime
minister's deal that she reached with the
European Union?
Obviously, it's just been rejected by the
Parliament, but the people would be asked.
Or do you think the U.K., in fact, now that
we know what we know, should remain in the
European Union?
Those are really the only two options on the
table -- Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The drama continues.
Ryan Chilcote, reporting for us from London,
thank you, Ryan.
RYAN CHILCOTE: Thank you.